docs: ADR-204 new comms architecture (#272)
decentraland/adr: content/ADR-204-comms-architecture.md

---
layout: adr
adr: 204
title: Comms Architecture for new client
date: 2024-08-21
status: Draft
type: RFC
spdx-license: CC0-1.0
authors:
  - pentreathm
  
---

## Abstract

The current Decentraland client communication protocol effectively supports user scaling but has inherent design limitations that restrict certain functionalities in Genesis City, such as content casting for in-world streaming, serverless multiplayer experiences, and being able to handle scene-hosted events with speaker moderators. This ADR explores the architectural decisions behind a new communication protocol designed to overcome these limitations. 

## Context, Reach & Prioritization 

> The new architecture, incompatible with the existing implementation, will be deployed in a forthcoming client version and become the new standard.The objective is to incorporate the following functionalities without overburdening the client implementation with additional complexities, while maintaining the ability to stream the world and visualize users in surrounding areas. This entails:

Reviewer: What do you think of linking the ADR with `existing implemenation`?

Author: done

> The new architecture, incompatible with the existing implementation, will be deployed in a forthcoming client version and become the new standard.The objective is to incorporate the following functionalities without overburdening the client implementation with additional complexities, while maintaining the ability to stream the world and visualize users in surrounding areas. This entails:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new architecture, incompatible with the existing implementation, will be deployed in a forthcoming client version and become the new standard. The objective is to incorporate the following functionalities without overburdening the client implementation with additional complexities, while maintaining the ability to stream the world and visualize users in surrounding areas. This entails:
```

- **Enable Content Casting**: Facilitate voice and video streaming in a scene, even when multiple clusters (islands) of users are present.
- **Authorization Management**: Empower scene owners or their authorized third parties to manage content casting and moderate voice chat accessibility within a scene.

> - **Consistency**: Ensure consistent perception of avatars/users within a scene, including scene state, content casting, and proximity of avatars.

Author: The section is about the new features, being able to see nearby profiles should be covered by Archipelago section

The Archipelago protocol scales efficiently due to its dynamic island calculations and users grouping, but a key limitation is that scenes have no direct authority over the communication channel. This prevents features like managing speaker permissions, streaming content to members of a cluster, or sharing metadata such as the states of objects within a scene. If scene-specific data were tied to the island, the island could shift its center to a different scene, leading to conflicts in data consistency or permissions, as the island's dynamic nature might affect scene control.

### Solution 

> Maintain the current Archipelago implementation while establishing a new scene room connection specific to the active scene. The Archipelago channel should be reserved solely for receiving avatar positions, profile update notifications, and nearby chat messages with the objective to be able to interact with users beyond the limits of a scene. All communications, including voice chat, scene objects state, and streams, will be shared within the scene channel. 

Author: added

This new model grants scene owners authority over the communication channel, allowing them to share content streams, share object states or handling speakers, providing a consistent experience for all users visiting the scene.

> ![comms](/resources/ADR-204/comms.png)

Author: it renders well when you open the site https://99e73654.adr-cvq.pages.dev/adr/ADR-204

> In the illustrated scenario, Peers 1, 2, and 3 are connected to the scene room `E1`. Additionally, Peer 1 establishes a connection to the island `I1`, while Peers 2 and 3 are linked to the island `I2`. This example serves as a simplified illustration. Users may be far apart within the same scene, but this aims to demonstrate that if a peer is at the edge of a scene, they will be able to see other players who are not within the scene but are within viewing range. On the other hand, the scene channel will be there to share consistent data among the visitors, like a stream of video on a texture or the state of an object like a door that can be opened or closed besides also sharing information about the users visiting the scene. 

Reviewer 2: Technically, yes. The state of the scene (CRDT State) should be saved, and when it enters the scene room, it should receive the state and synchronize the scene.

So User B will see the door opened when it joins the scene and the state gets syncronized.

> In the illustrated scenario, Peers 1, 2, and 3 are connected to the scene room `E1`. Additionally, Peer 1 establishes a connection to the island `I1`, while Peers 2 and 3 are linked to the island `I2`. This example serves as a simplified illustration. Users may be far apart within the same scene, but this aims to demonstrate that if a peer is at the edge of a scene, they will be able to see other players who are not within the scene but are within viewing range. On the other hand, the scene channel will be there to share consistent data among the visitors, like a stream of video on a texture or the state of an object like a door that can be opened or closed besides also sharing information about the users visiting the scene. 

Author: yes, what @kuruk-mm said is correct.

The table below outlines the information that will be communicated through each channel.

| Protocol Messages| island           | scene-room        |
|------------------|------------------|------------------|
| Positions/Movements| ✅               | ✅               |
| Profile Events   | ✅               | ✅               |
| Voice            |                  | ✅               |
| Cast Stream      |                  | ✅               |
| Scene State      |                  | ✅               |
| Nerby Chat       | ✅               | ✅               |

#### Design Considerations 

> The establishment of the connection with the island remains unchanged, as that portion of the protocol is the same. The key difference lies in the types of messages sent through the channel. To establish a connection with a scene-room, a new service called [Gatekeeper](https://github.com/decentraland/comms-gatekeeper/) will be introduced to manage token permissions for the transport layer ([LiveKit](https://livekit.io/)). Only one scene room can be active at a time, as a user can only be present in one scene at any given moment. The scene room operates similarly to the communication service implementation used in worlds, where each scene has its own dedicated room. The Gatekeeper service will also allow scene owners to create authorizations for users, which will be reflected in the LiveKit token. This capability will enable them to moderate voice interactions and data streams within the scene effectively.

Reviewer: > Only one scene room can be active at a time, 

What is the limit of connected peers and what happpens if that limit is achieved?

![comms-services](/resources/ADR-204/comms-services.png)

- **[Realm Provider](https://github.com/decentraland/realm-provider/)**: This small service is responsible for delivering a realm description in accordance with [ADR-110](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-110). It specifies the list of services required to connect to Decentraland and provides the communications adapter, which points to the Archipelago workers stack.

> - **WebSocket connector**: Entry Point for the Communications Backend. This component exposes the WebSocket defined in the `commsAdapter` section of the realm description and in accordance with [ADR-180 Communication protocol](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-180). Connected users send their positions through this channel and receive an Archipelago island ID to which they will be connected and the required settings to connect to the LiveKit room (transport) where the island messages will be exchanged with the cluster of users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **WebSocket connector**: Entry Point for the Communications Backend. This component exposes the WebSocket defined in the `commsAdapter` section of the realm description and in accordance with [ADR-180 Communication protocol](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-180). Connected users send their positions through this channel and receive an Archipelago island ID, along with the necessary settings to connect to the LiveKit room (transport) where island messages will be exchanged with the cluster of users.
```

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
participant C as Decentraland Client
participant R as Realm Provider
participant WS as WebSocket Connector
participant N as NATS
participant A as Archipelago Core
participant L as LiveKit 
Note over A: Initialize LiveKit Transport
  A->>N: subscribe: peer.*.heartbeat/disconnect
  C->>WS: Heartbeat with position 
	WS->>N: publish: peer.0x....heartbeat
	WS->>N: subscribe: peer.0x...island_changed 
	A->>N: publish: peer.0x...island_change: islandId & connStr 
	N-->>WS: islandID & connectionStr
	WS-->>C: IslandId & connectionStr
	C->>L: connect to LiveKit room Id = islandId
	L-->>C: roomConnection
	C->>L: msgs to roomId: movement / nearby chat
	L-->>L: brocast msg to roomId participants 
```

#### 3. Scene Room

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
actor User
participant C as Decentraland Client
participant G as GateKeeper 
participant L as LiveKit 

  User->>C: move to parcel 
	C->>G: Get sceneRoom 
	G-->>C: room connectionStr
	C->>L: Connect to Scene Room (realm:sceneId): connectionStr
	L-->>C: roomConnection 
	C->>L: send message: movement / playEmote / chat / voice / announceProfileV
	L-->>L: brodcast msg to roomId participats 
```

## Protocol Messages  

> The protocol messages for profiles, positions, and updates have been optimized for client performance, aiming to minimize data transmission through the channels. In this new implementation, profiles are no longer sent through the island and are instead retrieved from the Catalyst network. When a user updates their profile, a notification is sent, and the updated profile is downloaded from the servers. This approach ensures that avatar impersonation is prevented, as the signed profile is retrieved from a trusted Catalyst node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The protocol messages for profiles, positions, and updates have been optimized for client performance, aiming to minimize data transmission through the channels. In this new implementation, profiles' data is no longer sent through the island and is instead retrieved from the Catalyst network. When a user updates their profile, a notification is sent, and the updated profile is downloaded from the servers. This approach ensures that avatar impersonation is prevented, as the signed profile is retrieved from a trusted Catalyst node.
```

TBD 

## Deadline

Date: TBD

## Consequences

- The protocol and architecture for the communication services will undergo significant changes with this implementation. This means that users connecting through clients built on the previous version of the protocol will not be able to interact with those using clients on this new version. 
- Voice chat will be routed through the scene room. If one user is on a road and another is on the floor, each in different scenes, they won’t be able to hear each other. This decision was made to give the scene owners the control over the voice chat on their scenes. 

> - Duplicated messages, such as positions, profiles, and text chats, may be transmitted across both island and scene rooms. This can lead to inefficient data transfer; however, it can be optimized on the client side by adjusting the message frequency for each channel based on the number of active connections. This design trade-off was necessary to meet all criteria and to visualize and interact with users within the scene and users close to the scene boundaries.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Duplicated messages, such as positions, profiles, and text chats, may be transmitted across both island and scene rooms. This can lead to inefficient data transfer; however, it can be optimized on the client side by adjusting the message frequency for each channel based on the number of active connections. This design trade-off was necessary to meet all the criteria and enable visualization and interaction with users both within the scene and near its boundaries.
```

---
layout: adr
adr: 204

> title: Comms Architecture for new client

Reviewer 4: I strongly suggest not putting the `2.0` nor `new client` here since this protocol is used in clients. Let's continue versioning the comms, the next version would be v5

> title: Comms Architecture for client 2.0

Author: ```suggestion
title: New Comms Architecture 
```

- **WebSocket connector**: Entry Point for the Communications Backend. This component exposes the WebSocket defined in the `commsAdapter` section of the realm description and in accordance with [ADR-180 Communication protocol](https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-180). Connected users send their positions through this channel and receive an Archipelago island ID, along with the necessary settings to connect to the LiveKit room (transport) where island messages will be exchanged with the cluster of users.
- **Core**: Implements all Archipelago heuristics to calculate and assign an island to a user based on their position.
- **Stats**: A service that exposes users' positions and islands to display realm statistics, providing insights into hot scenes and identifying where crowds are gathering.
- **[NATS](https://nats.io/)**: Message broker to exchange information between services. 

> **Rom Limits**: The transport layer (LiveKit) does not impose a strict limit on the number of participants in a single room. The real constraint comes from the end user’s bandwidth and the client’s ability to process data efficiently to render nearby players. In Archipelago, islands are capped at a maximum of 100 players, a limitation originally introduced to prevent performance degradation when rendering large numbers of avatars simultaneously.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
**Room Limits**: The transport layer (LiveKit) does not impose a strict limit on the number of participants in a single room. The real constraint comes from the end user’s bandwidth and the client’s ability to process data efficiently to render nearby players. In Archipelago, islands are capped at a maximum of 100 players, a limitation originally introduced to prevent performance degradation when rendering large numbers of avatars simultaneously.
```

- `incremental_id`: A monotonic counter that grows with every sent message. It is used for messages deduplication 
- `urn`: The Uniform Resource Name (URN) of the emote being performed.

**Looping Emotes Replication**

For a looping emote this message should be replicated every cycle to ensure its visibility for a newly joined peer.

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
  actor A as Peer
  participant B as LiveKit  
  A->>A: Play Emote "Dance"
  A->>A: Increment ID
  A->>B: Broadcast PlayerEmote(incremental_id, "Dance")
  A->>A: Is the emote looping?
  alt is Yes
    loop every emote cycle
        A->>A: Don't increment ID
        A->>B: Broadcast PlayerEmote(incremental_id, "Dance")
    end
  end    
  
```

> Note: when a peer joins a room they will miss information about emotes currently being played. If an emote is looping they will receive it with the next message

### Movement (Compressed)

```protobuf
message MovementCompressed {
  int32 temporal_data = 1; // bit-compressed: timestamp + animations 
  int64 movement_data = 2; // bit-compressed: position + velocity 
}

> ```

Reviewer 4: Hey folks, since adding all the compressed complexity (and the assumption in each part) is not priceless, I imagine you have an analysis report to share the trade-off here. Adding that analysis to understand the real motivation behind this would be interesting. Also, it'd be interesting to have the comparison in the practice (maybe benchmarks or theoretical scenarios):

- We have a 48-byte message (uncompressed) vs. a 12-byte message (`MovementCompreesed`). You could reduce the 48-byte message to 40-byte or fewer with significantly less commitment and assumptions. But let's take 48/12=4; this is the gain ratio. Have you considered the LiveKit overhead that this is sent on top of that? This is directly affected, and it results in a lower gain ratio. Then you also have the WebRTC overhead and then the UDP/IP layer (I imagine this is sent by the unreliable way)

- What are the rationale behind each constant? I can guess some of them, but let's not leave it to the imagination.

- Instead of having the constant, would it be more suitable to have a `MovementHeader` (to be announced with the profile maybe) where all the constant are set it up for that profile? It'd be far flexible and you avoid explain the constant here, only the limitations. For instance, you send the minValues, maxValues, nBits, etc.

| (PARCEL_BITS + 2 * XZ_BITS + Y_BITS + 2 * VELOCITY_BITS) - (PARCEL_BITS + 2 * XZ_BITS + Y_BITS + 3 * VELOCITY_BITS - 1) | **Z Velocity**:<br/> Uses Velocity Compression:<br/>`minValue = 0`<br/>`maxValue = MAX_SPEED`<br/>`sizeInBits = VELOCITY_BITS`    |

**Parcel Linearization**

```csharp
        public static class GenesisCityData
        {
            public static readonly Vector2Int MIN_PARCEL = -150 * Vector2Int.one;
            public static readonly Vector2Int MAX_PARCEL = new (163, 158);
        }
        
        public int MinX => GenesisCityData.MIN_PARCEL.x - terrainData.borderPadding;
        public int MinY => GenesisCityData.MIN_PARCEL.y - terrainData.borderPadding;
        public int MaxX => GenesisCityData.MAX_PARCEL.x + terrainData.borderPadding;
        public int MaxY => GenesisCityData.MAX_PARCEL.y + terrainData.borderPadding;
        
        public int Encode(Vector2Int parcel) =>
            parcel.x - MinX + ((parcel.y - MinY) * width);

        public Vector2Int Decode(int index) =>
            new ((index % width) + MinX, (index / width) + MinY);
```

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 4: Anyway, we should talk about another way to set up the relative parcel you are. Setting 17 bits to this index is a hard-limit that we already are close with Genesis City.

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 6: Let's try to avoid referencing `new client` and make it more generic

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 4: > If we want to ensure that that different clients can properly decode the message we need to have this included in ADR.
I agree that all the information should be here in the ADR. But we can approach an identical implementation even if we remove the genesis city shape&size from here.

Setting different origins for player to refer the relative position is a good approach. Then, we can take advantage of that for sending less data. But I think it's a bad idea to put Genesis City shape and size here to index parcels. I also think 17bits is a hard-limit and really close to what we currently have for Genesis-City.

I can add the idea of using another message to send the references/settings instead of hard-coding it.

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Author: @leanmendoza for me the class serves as a reference to GenesisCity data and is not a canonical model for any metaverse. I believe it functions well as an implementation and can be adapted for other use cases. How would you suggest documenting this as part of the current implementation?

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 4: @pentreathm 
What the The data transport relies on this index, it's not only a reference. The first 0-16 bits are the index based on this class, if you call Decode(0) => (-152, -152)

The indexes parameters could easily be a different message for setting up the comms, read my other comment https://github.com/decentraland/adr/pull/272#discussion_r1865581408 the idea of MovementHeader (sent only once per player maybe)

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 2: ```
            public static readonly Vector2Int MIN_PARCEL = -150 * Vector2Int.one;
            public static readonly Vector2Int MAX_PARCEL = new (163, 158);
```

It should not be hardcoded, we should get that data from one somewhere.
It can be in the `/about` or a MovementHeader like @leanmendoza is proposing.

The Protocol should be agnostic to Genesis City.
Genesis City is a protocol implementation, not the protocol.

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Author: I see, we could expose it in the /about under `comms` if needed. @mikhail-dcl what do you think about these options?

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 2: We have that data available in the /about endpoint right now.

Example: https://realm-provider-ea.decentraland.org/main/about

We can process the sizes in the `configurations.map.sizes` and get the minimum bottom, maximum top, minimum left, and maximum right values. Then, we can use these values.

```
...
  "configurations": {
    "map": {
      ...
      "sizes": [
        { "left": -150, "top": 150, "right": 150, "bottom": -150 },
        { "left": 62, "top": 158, "right": 162, "bottom": 151 },
        { "left": 151, "top": 150, "right": 163, "bottom": 59 }
      ],
      ...
    }
  },
```
If you query Genesis Plaza, you will get:
```
Maximum right: 163
Minimum left: -150
Maximum top: 158
Minimum bottom: -150
```

which is the same data used in your definition:
```
            public static readonly Vector2Int MIN_PARCEL = -150 * Vector2Int.one;
            public static readonly Vector2Int MAX_PARCEL = new (163, 158);
```

here is the ADR of that spec: https://adr.decentraland.org/adr/ADR-250

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Reviewer 7: We decided to move parcel information to `Metadata`: it will no longer be compressed and will be set only when the parcel is changed. Thus, your concern will be covered and no extra info is needed.

We need to try it out first in E@ to understand how reliable it is before moving on.

> `terrainData.borderPadding = 2` in the new client.

Author: @mikhail-dcl could you please update the ADR so that we can resolve the comments and merge it?

- Extracts the sign information from the LSB and shifts the remaining bits to isolate the magnitude.
- Decompresses the magnitude back to a float using the original range and precision.
- Restores the original sign of the velocity and returns the decompressed value.

These functions achieve efficient storage and retrieval of signed floating-point velocities by encoding the sign in the LSB and compressing the magnitude with quantization.

### Movement

```protobuf
message Movement {
  // command number
  float timestamp = 1;
  // world position
  float position_x = 2;
  float position_y = 3;
  float position_z = 4;
  // velocity
  float velocity_x = 5;
  float velocity_y = 6;
  float velocity_z = 7;
  // animations
  float movement_blend_value = 8;
  float slide_blend_value = 9;
  bool is_grounded = 10;
  bool is_jumping = 11;
  bool is_long_jump = 12;
  bool is_long_fall = 13;
  bool is_falling = 14;

  bool is_stunned = 15;
  
  float rotation_y = 16;
}
```

Uncompressed `Movement` message can be used for debugging purposes, and it is optional to implement.
It represents right the same values as the compressed version but without quantization and other compression techniques.

> Implementing this message is not sufficient to be compatible with the new client and its processing can be fully disabled in the production mode.

Reviewer 6: If we want to keep this quite generic and abstract, we probably should not mention new client here, and rather mention that MovementCompressed must be implemented. Maybe something like that?
```suggestion
Implementing this message is not sufficient to be compatible with this version of comms as its processing can be fully disabled in the production mode. To ensure full functionality we should implement `MovementCompressed` as a main way to pass the data between clients
```

Maintain the current Archipelago implementation while establishing a new scene room connection specific to the active scene. The Archipelago channel should be reserved solely for receiving avatar positions, profile update notifications, and nearby chat messages with the objective to be able to interact with users beyond the limits of a scene. All communications, including voice chat, scene objects state, and streams, will be shared within the scene channel. 
This new model grants scene owners authority over the communication channel, allowing them to share content streams, share object states or handling speakers, providing a consistent experience for all users visiting the scene.

> At any given moment, a user can maintain up to two connections: one with the current scene and another with the island. When the scene changes, the existing connection to the previous scene should be closed, and a new connection to the current scene must be established. 

Reviewer 4: Is there a specific reason to limit to only one scene connection? Wouldn't it be up to the explorer to determine how many scene-rooms can handle?

Author: Ultimately, it is the client’s responsibility to manage the number of open connections. However, keep in mind that maintaining multiple open connections is resource-intensive, and the data transmitted over the scene channel can require substantial bandwidth to share scene state and other streams. It is advisable to keep a connection open only with the scene that the user is currently interacting with.
